Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops and
today I'm joined by Nandita Bajaj. She's the executive
director of Population Balance, a US nonprofit that works
to inspire narrative, behavioral and system change that shrinks
our human impact and elevates the rights and well-being
of people, animals, and the planet. She co-hosts the
overpopulation podcast and she's Also a senior lecturer at
the Institute for Human Education at Antioch University, where
she teaches about the combined impacts of pro-natalism and
human expansionism on reproductive ecological and intergenerational justice. So,
today we're going to talk about overpopulation, birth rates,
pro-natalism, abortion, and related topics. So, Nandita, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Ricardo, thank you so much for having me. It's
my pleasure to be here.
So let me start by asking you, how do
we determine, first of all, where there is, whether
there is overpopulation or underpopulation?
Yes, um, that is a large question, so I
will give a little bit of background, historical background,
specifically about the human species. Um, SO, every species,
uh, and we are one of the many The
species has a carrying capacity, which is an ecological
term that describes the maximum number of a population
that a habitat can support without becoming irreversibly degraded
and um able to sustain a population um indefinitely.
And so human beings, uh, we have been around
in the form of Homo sapiens for about 250
to 300,000 years. So we've been around for a
really long time and for most of our history,
so 99.9% of our history, we existed at a
population that was below 1 million. So I live
in Toronto in Canada, and the population of Toronto
is 3 million. So imagine the entire global population
of human beings less than 1 million for most
of our history. And during that time, we lived
in relative balance with the rest of life on
Earth and to give you uh a proportional idea.
We represented 1% of the weight of all of
the mammals, and 99% of the rest of the
weight was wildlife. So we were 1%, 99% was
wild. So we were one of the many species
living in relative balance with life on Earth, and
that was when we were living as gatherers and
hunters. Um, THIS is, you know, before the last
ice age, and before we started engaging in, um,
domestication of animals and plants. And so, over the
last 10,000 years, but really over the last couple
of 100 years, our population has skyrocketed, unlike any
other species on the planet, and we have single-handedly
created so much degradation on Earth that we find
ourselves in the midst of multiple reinforcing. Uh, CRISES,
and you can see the climate emergency is one
of them, the mass extinction event, the toxification of
air, land, and water, and uh the resource scarcity
that we are seeing. And so, the combination of
those forces is called ecological overshoot, in that we
are demanding 75% more from Earth than is sustainable.
And so you can see that single-handedly, one species
um has really colonized the rest of the planet
at the expense of most other nature, non-human species,
and also at our own peril. Like we also
face our own extinction in, in the long term,
just given that we are, we have degraded the
very biophysical basis of our existence. So to come
back to your question, um, the carrying capacity for
human beings has been calculated by a number of
different ecologists using a number of different methods, but
the range of human population that is considered to
be sustainable goes from anywhere in the hundreds of
millions, the total global population to 3 billion. And
that keeps in mind the integrity of the biosphere.
So we are not the only species, um, we,
um, are more in balance with the rest of
nature in that way and that we can sustain
our population at that level for hundreds of thousands
of more years. Um, SO from that perspective, a
population of 8 billion is considered to be Much
higher than what is sustainable and we don't need
to, we don't need numbers to know that. We
kind of see it all around us, right? We
are on a very destructive path, uh, where, uh,
you know, most of the other species, but also
we ourselves face, uh, the possibility of, of annihilation
and collapse.
But do we have a good idea of what
are the main factors that drive birth rates and
the growth or reduction of population sizes?
Yes, so, in nature, uh, there are positive and
negative feedback loops that kind of keep populations in
check. And, you know, like all other species, our
species also has the potential to grow exponentially and
to overshoot our carrying capacity. Um, BUT for millennia,
for hundreds of thousands of years, our population has
been kept in check through negative feedbacks in nature,
uh, whether it's through disease, through food scarcity, famine,
droughts, or war and conflict. But um it's really
only in the last couple of 100 years that
we've seen such an explosion in our population. So,
like I said, you know, for 250 to 300,000
years, we were such a small number in our
population, and then it took us all that time
to get to the first billion in about 1800.
And then in the last 200 years, we went
from 1 billion to 8 billion. Just an eightfold
increase. And at the heart of that um was
of course availability of abundant cheap fossil fuel energy
that allowed us to expand exponentially both in technology
and our consumption in addition to our population. Um,
BUT to come back specifically to your question of
what drives birth rates and what drives population growth,
is birth rates are driven primarily through, um, One
of the things that I study is pro-natalism, so
pushing people to have lots of children, and one
of the ways um society has done that is
by encouraging early childbirth. So the earlier a girl
or a woman begins to have children, the longer
uh time she has to have children, so the
more children she can have. And then also the
spacing of births. So how far apart each birth
is determines how many children a woman may have,
um, but also things like Um, in terms of
death rates, things like disease and famine, etc. WILL
keep that population in check, and sometimes even poor,
um, medicine or sanitation would create High infant mortality,
so not a lot of children would survive. And
so, with the advances in technology combined with pro-natalism,
uh, the push to have more children, to grow
populations, you see. You know, birth rates increasing, and
then the other aspect of population growth is people
simply living longer. So, um, in the past, you
know, even a few 100 years ago, humans would
only live to about 30 to 40 years. In
terms of life expectancy. And now we're living longer
to 70 to 80 years, so then there's just
people alive for longer, and we're adding more birds,
which then leads to growth in population.
Mhm. So is childlessness specifically a cause of declining
fertility rates? Has there been any explosion of childless,
childlessness anywhere, as some people claim?
Um, NO, so, um, I'll first tell you that,
you know, over the last 60, 70 years since
we first became aware that we had shot the
carrying capacity of our planet and that we were
in overshoot, there was great awareness, um, that society
had, cultures had that we had. Um, BECOME too
many people consuming too much and there was the
limits to growth study that came out of the
Club of Rome that was warning that if we
stayed on this path with um such huge population,
such great uh amounts of production, and such great
amounts of consumption that we would be on a
path of self-destruction and destruction of the biosphere. And
that came out You know, that came out in
the 1970s, 1972, I believe, and That's, you know,
now looking at it 50 something years later, we
are on track to a lot of the predictions
that were made in that report, but around that
time, there were also because of the awareness around
overpopulation, uh there were a lot of policies that
were put into place to encourage greater reproductive autonomy
and reduction in population rates. Um, SOME of the
population policies were horrible that actually were quite coercive
and egregious, like China's one-child policy and for forced
sterilization campaigns in Puerto Rico, in India. And you
know, some other coercive policies within Europe and in
the US, but majority of the policies that governments
put into place were actually empowering policies that uh
implemented educational opportunities for girls, ensuring that girls were
going to school, completing secondary education, that they weren't
being married as children. And that women generally had
access to contraceptives and ability to make decisions about
what, how many children they want if they want
them and so what we've seen is a really
amazing trend over the last 50 to 60 years
directly as a result of some of these empowering
policies is a decline in fertility rates around the
world. So, over 2/3 of the countries in the
world have now declining fertility rates, where people, individuals
and couples are choosing to have fewer children, and
they're having children later in life. So instead of
having children as teenagers or in their twenties, women
are now delaying childbirth and having children later in
life and also just fewer children, and some of
them aren't having any children at all. And so
There is a lot of alarmism right now, especially
um among right-wing nationalists that there is some kind
of an explosion in the, in childlessness or that
women aren't having any children at all. That is
not what the evidence shows. The demographic evidence throughout
the different countries shows that the number of children
people are having has declined from, say, 4 child
families to 22 child families or one child families.
And in some countries, yes, there are more people
who are choosing to have no children at all.
But there is no evidence that shows that declining
fertility rates are a result of some kind of
an explosion in childlessness.
So what is pro-natalism and what arguments do pro-natalists
tend to use?
Right. So, pro-natalism is very simply an ideology that
promotes childbirth. So it's a combination of societal and
institutional pressures that are placed on people, primarily women
to have children. And pro-natalism is everywhere. It's, you
know, the water that we're swimming in, the culture
that we live in promotes pro-natalism. Our families pressure
us into having children, whether it's to carry on
the family name, whether it's to carry on a
tradition, um, or to take care of us when
we get old, right? So family pressures are huge.
But then also, there are pressures from religions, religious
leaders want more followers. They want to grow their
religious strength, so they promote childbearing by um promoting
marriage, by uh banning or, you know, scoffing at
using contraceptives uh or getting abortions. Um, AND then
there's also political pressures or economic pressures from governments
that promote childbearing through incentives for having large families.
Uh, THEY are looking for more taxpayers, more, uh,
consumers, and a larger military. So, pro-natalism really is
everywhere, but it's not something that has always existed.
It's, um, it's an idea that's about as old
as patriarchy, which is about 5000 years old, and
it's really when it started becoming institutionalized when Uh,
empires and states were being formed with the rise
in civilizations, and elites and the leaders were looking
to grow the populations of their states, uh, so
that they could be stronger than the other states
or other tribes. And so, one way of growing
population is by really segregating the genders and creating
a tremendous amount of pressure on young women to
produce lots of children, but then also a tremendous
amount of pressure on young men to protect the
state by becoming soldiers. And so both the military
and pro-natalism Kind of emerged in an institutionalized manner
with the rise of patriarchy about 5000 years ago
and now through millennia of policies and rhetoric and
education, um, it has become um deeply internalized in
culture so much that we don't even see it
as, you know, some kind of Um, an ideology.
A lot of people just think it's completely natural
and normal and necessary for everyone to have children.
So does this also link then to reproductive rights,
particularly for women.
Definitely, um, pro-natalism by its nature, because it pushes
women to bear children regardless of what it is
that they might want, is undermining reproductive rights and
reproductive autonomy. Because you can see that when women
have the choice and autonomy to decide, um if
they want to have children and how many children
they want to have, fertility rates decline everywhere because
naturally and normally even prehistory, uh, women were having
far fewer children than we have seen in the
last 200 years. So, even in the last few
1000 years, but definitely, uh, with the rise in
the industrial revolution, we've just seen population grow so
quickly. Um, SO, it's directly tied to reproductive rights.
You, one would need to undermine reproductive autonomy in
order to ensure that women continue to bear the
number of children. You would like them to have
rather than what they would want to have naturally.
So do you think that this is really about
people worrying about population collapse, or do you think
that when it comes to pro-natalists and some right
wing ideologues that tend to associate with them, it
is more about pushing for conservative values, control over
women's reproduction and stuff like that.
Definitely, I think pro-natalism is very much intertwined with
patriarchal social norms. It's very much about having control
over women's reproduction. Um, AS I, um, said before,
there have been a number of historians who have
looked at anthropological studies to see that, you know,
in our history, there have been so many different
arrangements of humans thriving. So it's not always been
this traditional model of marriage and children. And so,
There have been many different ways in which humans
have lived, have had children, ah, not always lived
together. There have been kind of more matriarchal societies
and patriarchal types of societies, um, and eventually I
think patriarchal norms ended up becoming the dominant type
of norms, primarily because population growth depends on Uh,
keeping women subservient or having control over women's bodies,
because if women were truly allowed to be independent
as they are in so many countries around the
world now, you see that they are not having
a large number of children. They are doing other
things in life, they are, some are not even
marrying. Um, SO, women are more interested in pursuing
other life paths, including self-actualization, just like men have
done for millennia, and as should be the case,
but because Fertility rates are declining, and I must
say that population is not declining, right? Population is
still increasing. We're at 8 billion today, and according
to the United Nations projections, we're expected to add
another 2.5 billion people before the end of the
century. So we're expected to go to 10.5 to
11 billion. So population is nowhere to near collapsing.
So number one, the term is, uh, you know,
a form of disinformation. It's trying to create alarmism.
Um, BUT also to come back to what you
were saying, it's very much about promoting a very
conservative kind of right-wing ideology of marriage, childbirth, conservative
traditional type of family structures where men have the
power, women, women's primarily role, primary role is to
have babies. And it's one way to ensure that
that model survives is, is through that kind of
patriarchal norm, um, so that population can continue to
grow. And so you are seeing a rise in
much more conservatism around the world, especially as you've
seen with the turn to right-wing Christian nationalism even
in the United States and other countries. Much of
it is related to. More egalitarianism, like there is
just greater gender equality that has happened over the
last many decades, and that gender equality. IS seen
as a threat by some of the very powerful
leaders who want to ensure that the fertility decline
that follows gender equality doesn't continue this way.
Mhm. And how do questions surrounding population link to
topics like environmentalism and climate change?
Sure. So, population growth combined with our growth in
consumption, combined with the growth in production of all
the waste, uh, in the form of emissions and
pollution are directly related to environmental issues, one of
which is climate change. So, In the last 200
years, um, once we discovered fossil fuels and started
using abundant cheap energy, our population, of course, grew
by a factor of 8 from a billion to
8 billion, but our GDP growth and our consumption
increased by a factor of 100, right? So we
were not only so many people, but also consuming
a lot. And our fossil fuel use increased by
a factor of 1000 just in the last 200
years. So, as a direct result of there being
so many people consuming so much, even though the
population growth and the distribution in consumption has been
inequitable, right? There are, um, majority of the Emissions
if you were to see, look at emissions or
even consumption around the world has come from a
very small population, you know, 18% of the population.
So like I think something like 75% to 80%
of the energy used directly through hyper consumerism has
come from a very small rich elite population. Mostly
in the global north and western countries, um, but
regardless of that, there has been, um, also more
recently a growth in the number of people aspiring
to these types of ideals who want to actually
grow their own consumption patterns because majority of the
people, like 75% of the people live in the
global South. Many of those people live below what's
considered a sy, you know, a, a healthy standard
of living. So they live, many people live in
absolute poverty, um, and wish to and deserve to
grow their standard of living and increase their consumption.
So That has been happening a lot as well,
because a large number of people who are increasing
their consumption, even by a small amount, multiplies that
and increases the emissions and the energy use significantly.
So, climate change is one aspect of that where
a combination of population and consumption has directly caused
climate emissions. Uh, WE are seeing huge amounts of
biodiversity loss, uh, which is directly related again to
our consumption patterns, mostly related to our industrial food
production. Um, SO I'll give you some statistics, you
know, almost half of the habitable land on Earth
is used for industrial agriculture to grow food for
humans. And that is habitat that belongs to other
species who have every right to be here just
as we do. And so, what's happened is a
lot of those species have been moved away from
their land, and then a lot of animals who
are considered a threat to agricultural land are killed
off. So what we are seeing is a decline
in biodiversity and a decline in wild populations, both
on land and in freshwater. Mainly because of industrial
agriculture that uses a ton of land, but also
70% of the fresh water. So you can see
what's happening to those populations. There's a significant decline
in those. We're also seeing toxification, you know, huge
amounts of pollution, um, because of emissions, because of,
um, Fertilizer emissions from agriculture, but also all of
the different industries that create all of this stuff
for us, like plastics, um, etc. So you can
See, uh, climate change, biodiversity loss, species extinction, and
global toxification are all related to one species, and
that's humans, and simply because, especially in the last
200 years that we've seen all of these issues
emerge in a way that we've never seen in
our history, right? We've never changed the climate. As
quickly and as badly as we have done in
just the last 200 years. And so that's directly
related to the growth in human population and consumption.
So I think that related to that. In what
ways do you think that ideas surrounding population growth
connect to ideas surrounding the need for a near
infinite economic growth?
Yes, economic growth really is one of the main
drivers. In addition to some of the other things
I mentioned, you know, nationalism, ethnocentrism, religious, uh, growth,
all of them drive this need for population. Um,
SO there are lots of different institutions that benefit
from population growth, but economic growth or economy is
one of those very powerful institutions. So, Economic growth
is now seen as the ultimate. Descriptor or metric
of progress in a lot of countries, even though
we know report after report shows that economic growth
does not lead to growth and prosperity. It does
not lead to uh a reduction or eradication of
poverty, and it definitely does not lead to, you
know, better standards of living for majority of the
people. Because so much of our economic growth model
or thinking is based on this idea that if
you grow the economy, you then use the taxes
from people to then distribute those to the rest
of the population so you could have um more
equitable distribution or reduction of poverty. But that has
not been the case. We have interviewed so many
ecological economists. We recently interviewed the UN Special Rapporteur
on extreme poverty and human rights, Olivia the shooter,
and he recently wrote a report called The Poverty
of Growth, which actually outlines all of the reasons
in which Economic growth is not a good metric
to use as an indicator of progress, but to
your point, economic growth, because it's become so ideologically
based in cultural and political thinking, is that without
looking at any of the evidence, all of the
politicians and economists are constantly talking about the need
to grow the economy. And Intertwined with that need
is economic growth. In their mind relies on population
growth, that if you have more people who are
paying into the taxes, who are buying more stuff.
Helps to grow the economy and so that's why
they are pushing for greater population growth that's why
they're pushing for these pro-natalist policies uh that's why
they're panicking that fertility rates are declining even though
declining fertility rates have actually made countries better off,
um, economically, you know, if you look at some
of the countries where fertility rates have declined. Um,
THERE is greater rates of employment, um, greater affordability
in terms of housing, you know, housing has become
so extremely expensive. Um, BECAUSE of competition that most
people cannot afford to purchase a house, so you're
seeing as countries where populations are declining even slightly,
there's actually greater progress and, and greater social well-being
because there's less competition, because there's greater distribution. So,
the idea of economic growth tied to population growth,
even though it's deeply embedded within our countries, it's,
it's the wrong idea. But it's also at the
heart of so many of our ecological crises, because
one way. That we have learned to structure our
economies is we believe that. Our planet falls under
the economy, like our ecology is a subset of
the economy, you know, that economic growth is more
important than anything else. And often. What a lot
of um economic models are based on is externalizing
a lot of the costs, real costs of what
we are doing to the environment. So The reason
we are able to access such cheap stuff and
you know, such cheap labor is because we are
undermining two things. One is human rights, uh, where
a lot of the stuff that is being produced
so cheaply is being done by people who have
very few rights, including child laborers. Um, WHO get
paid almost next to nothing for the work that
they are doing, right? So it's a form of
um modern slavery, um, or simply just overexploitation of
people. And the second externalized cost is what we
are doing to the rest of nature and non-human
animals. So the reason we are able to have
stuff stuff so cheap is because we put absolutely
no value on nature, on earth, on the trees,
on the animals. We kind of see them as
resources. Right? And that's an extend extension of this
worldview of human supremacy, that we are the only
species that matters. Everything else just exists for us,
and therefore we can exploit and dominate and You
know, eradicate anything else for our own our own
well-being. And so much of the cost that we're
seeing environmentally and ecologically and in terms of human
rights is actually externalized, so the thing that we
pay, you know, $5 for really should be $5000
that most people wouldn't be able to afford them
because you're including the real cost. Of creating a
laptop or creating a cell phone, rather than externalizing
that cost onto the in quote unquote environment, which
is nature, other human beings or other non-human beings.
So, I have one final question then, because there's
been also much alarmism surrounding this, particularly in the
more developed countries. On the topic of aging populations
and social security, do aging populations really need more
babies?
Well, that's what uh you hear a lot in
the media narratives and in politicians talking, right, is
there is a baby bust or a fertility crisis
where not enough babies are being born to provide
the social security for the aging population. And so
I'll explain to you the thinking behind that first.
Um, SO, we just spoke about how our economic
models are based. And Much of our recent economic
modeling is based on this um pyramid scheme or
a Ponzi scheme where you have a large number
of working age population. Uh, WHO then are taxed
or who are basically paying into the pensions or
Social Security for the elderly population once they retire
or once they stop working. And um that has
been the model that's been used for, you know,
over 100 years, and or maybe even less than
that. But that model is, is hugely flawed, really,
because it is based at a time when you
had a growing population, right? Our population has only
been growing in the last 200 years. It has
not been growing for most of our human history.
So our model is based on a really small
window of our human history. When our population was
growing and there were more people of working age
because people were having more children, there were more
people of working age than there were older people.
And that model worked for some amount of time.
However, over again, the last couple of 100 years,
also, we have, or maybe even sorry, 50 or
60 years, we have seen two trends emerging. And
they have happened simultaneously. So over the last 70
years, especially after the Second World War, we have
started to see um a decline in fertility rates,
which is a positive trend because it signifies greater
gender equality, greater reproductive autonomy, greater rights for children.
And the second positive trend has been. A um
increase in the lifespan of an average human. So
when we were living, you know, to 30 or
40 years, we are now living longer, healthier lives.
So both of those trends are positive trends that
we should be celebrating. Instead, a lot of governments
and politicians are. Um, USING the narrative that an
aging population is some kind of a crisis and
a fertility decline. IS some kind of a crisis.
So you can see the thinking is already upside
down because there are two very positive trends that
we should be celebrating. Um, AND then this idea
that we need more people, more babies in order
to support the aging population is um really upside
down. It's, it's wrongheaded idea because Are The, the
reason we currently have more people generally in most
countries, we do have more people who are older
than there are working age population. So instead of
a pyramid that's like this, it's an upside down
pyramid where there are more people who are older.
But that is a transitional phase, because that, as
I said, was a very small time frame during
which our population um increased so much, so quickly.
And once that elderly population passes on. You can
see people are having fewer and fewer children, the
following generations, that means we're not producing more people
than there are older people. So, number one, it's
a transitional phase that means we only need to
figure out what to do for the next, you
know, 10 to 20 years, once that pyramid starts
to flatten out. Number 2, think of it this
way. A baby born today, how is that baby?
One, how is that child productive enough to provide
the taxpayer money that is needed to support an
elderly population? A baby is not productive for at
least 20 years until they start working. So it's,
it's kind of this wrongheaded thinking where people aren't
really thinking about what, what are possible solutions other
than just pushing women to have lots of children.
So some different ways that you can think of
supporting the aging population. Number 1, instead of putting
in billions of dollars into pro-natalist policies, you could
be putting that exact money into creating a Social
Security plan for the aging population. Right? All of
those billions of dollars are actually not working because
once women determine how many children they want, you
cannot bribe them to have more children. Right? And
the only way you can do that is through
coercive means, which we are starting to see happen
in many countries where we are seeing abortion bans
being put into place to coerce women into having
children. You are seeing sanctions on contraceptives that are
not no longer freely available to people. You are
seeing. Uh, NARRATIVES or policies like in Russia, where
if you are uh caught promoting the child-free choice,
like people deciding to not have children, you can
be fined significantly, it's called child-free propaganda. You can
see in Hungary, where if you have 4 or
more children, you don't pay any taxes for life.
Uh, RIGHT, but it's, there's lots of things happening
around different countries where reproductive choices being taken away
from women in order to push them into to
have children, um, in order to often, you know,
support this elderly growing population. So instead of putting
all that money towards pronatalist policies which aren't working,
you could use that money to put towards the
elderly care. The other thing is, even though people
are aging, they are living healthier lives. That means
they're actually productive for a lot longer than 64
years, right? My father is 80 years old and
he's still actively working. Uh, HE'S very much engaged
and so is my mother in her 70s, and
a lot of people. You know, are living healthier,
longer lives, that means they don't get old old
until much later. That means they don't need that
medical or social care until much later. So instead
of looking at elderly people as burdens, it would
be important to also see them as dignified members
of society, uh, rather than, you know, people who
are requiring all of these um services. But then
you also look at how our Social Security or
tax system is based, right? What if we started
to tax the wealthy, really started to tax the
wealthy? Um, THERE'S a lot of money available from
that that can then be redirected towards social security
programs. What if we redirected subsidies that the governments
are putting towards really destructive industries like the fossil
fuel industry, like the animal agricultural industry, to Again,
or the military, right? The military budget is extremely
huge. What if you took a fraction of that
money and you put that toward supporting Social Security?
So the thing is, there's no shortage of creative
ideas that governments can use to support an aging
population. It's just that our governments are stuck in
such terrible thinking and such outdated thinking um of
models that are no longer working for us, that
are no longer working for most of the people
and that are not working for our environment. Um,
AND we really need to get out of that
kind of thinking and, and in our podcast we
interview a lot of folks who offer alternatives to
where we could move our economic structures and how
can we embrace an aging population rather than panicking
about it.
Great, really fascinating, so Nandita, just before we go,
would you like to tell people where they can
find you and your work on the Internet?
Absolutely. Thank you, Ricardo. So, you can find us
on Populationbalance.org, that's our website. We do a number
of things. So we are a nonprofit think tank
and we produce two podcasts. One is the overpopulation
podcast in which we interview ecologists, anthropologists, feminists, economists.
Um, AND journalists to talk about alternatives to our
current growth biased system, alternatives that are equitable, that
are rights-based, that are ecocentric, that consider the rights
of humans and non-humans. So that's a really great
podcast that's available on every platform and including on
YouTube. And then the other podcast that I recently
started, it's a storytelling podcast where I interview individuals
and couples to talk about how they are challenging
pro-natalist narratives and pressures to to redefine family and
what it means for them to live their life
with fulfillment. And that podcast is called Beyond Pronatalism,
Finding Fulfillment With or Without Kids. So that podcast
is also available on every platform. And then the
other two things that we do is we produce
academic peer-reviewed research. So if you'd like to read
any of our work on pro-natalism, on ecocentrism, or
population denial, you can check out our populationbalance.org page
and you, we have a peer-reviewed research under there.
And we also write a lot of media articles,
op-eds, to challenge these mainstream growth bias narratives. And
if you're looking for learning or educating yourself on
good arguments to counteract all of these destructive, extractive,
you know, growth biased. Narratives, uh, you can look
at some of our articles. They are meant to
be really educational for the public. So those are
all the things, um, and yeah, you can, people
can reach us through our website if they'd like
to be interviewed for any of our podcasts or
if they'd like to interview us for, for any
of their work.
Great, I will be leaving some links to all
of that in the description of the interview and
Nitta, thank you so much for taking the time
to come on the show. It's been a real
pleasure to talk with you.
Ricardo, thank you so much for having me. I
love what you do. You're providing such an important
service, and it was really wonderful talking to you
as well.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullern, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs called Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal Herzognun
Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearraujurumen ro Diego Londono Correa. Yannick Punterrusmani
Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary Galman
Samovallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall Edin
Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti Gabrielon Corteseus Slelitsky, Scott
Zachary Fishtim Duffyani Smith Jen Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William
Buckner, Paul Georgianeau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson,
Peter Vozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray,
Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry
D. Lee Junior, old Eringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then
Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix,
Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van
Goller, Alexander Hubbert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Net. A special
thanks to my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank
Lucas Steffini, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benick Muller,
Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal
Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.